---
author: Gregory Chamberlain
cover-image: 'media/kak-cover.png'
date: 'Friday, 06 September 2019'
lang: 'en-GB'
subtitle: |
    A Vim convert's commentary on Kakoune, the selection-oriented editor
    focused on interactivity and incremental results---or mawww's experiment
    for a better code editor.
title: 'The Vim-Inspired Editor with a Linguistic Twist'
---

What is Kakoune?
================

[Kakoune] (/kə\'kuːn/) describes itself as "a code editor heavily
inspired by Vim", and like the venerable vi(1) and its successor, its
internal model interprets the user's keystrokes like utterances of a
sort-of "text-editing language", but with a certain linguistic twist
(more on that later). Available---for reasons that will later become
clear---only on Unix-like systems, it was written in C++ by [Maxime
Coste], has a clean [code base] and runs like the wind in a terminal.

*Skip ahead 700 words to [Using Kakoune] if you just want to get stuck
in right away.* Come back if you get totally confused.

As a long time Vim user, Kakoune quickly peaked my interest and before
long I was convinced that it was the editor for me, and not just because
it's incredibly obscure. Its grammatical reshuffle and wise design
principles put it above the rest for me, and I'm starting to think it's
more than just a comfy nook in which to hide from the large and looming
cold hand of Emacs, the curious GNUisance (sorry) that swings
periodically over my shoulder whispering "we have Org mode! And Lisp!"
Maybe next year, Emacs. I really want to like you.

But that's an essay for another day.

Here I endeavour to introduce the reader to Kakoune and present my
thoughts on its merits and misfits in the context of a terminal-based,
keyboard-driven workflow. I make frequent comparisons to Vim, and the
reader would benefit from some experience with a modal editor such
thereas. That said, those uninitiated in modal editors might find that
Kakoune's forgiving mechanics places it among the easier to learn.

Do we really need another Vim clone?
====================================

This is neither a fork nor clone.

In an effort to provide incremental results and interactivity (words
whose meaning became clear once I met the `s` key), the
"selection-oriented code editor" takes a bold step away from some of the
Vim interactions familiar to many of us, while remaining competitive
keystroke-for-keystroke, millisecond-for-precious-millisecond.

Its author cites the Unix philosophy as one of Kakoune's virtues, and
certainly I would agree that it trumps Vim in adherence thereto
(examples of this to come); and that is not to say it lacks enough
features. Indeed it has built-in wrappers around git(1), grep(1),
make(1), and man(1), works with ctags, conforming linters and other
things.

<figure>
<script id="asciicast-0MLTST9LQYdJ6JNQvmSsaBV7U"
           src="https://asciinema.org/a/0MLTST9LQYdJ6JNQvmSsaBV7U.js"
           async></script>
</figure>

Vim is difficult to extend, not least because of its idiosyncratic and
unreadable train wreck of a language, VimL. Kakoune, on the other hand,
stands by its decision not to complect its language with flow control and
whatnot, and instead relies on languages we already know through its
`%sh{…}` blocks. And although Kakoune is very usable out-of-the-box, one
look at the [plugins page] is enough to make any purist cave.

So what's the twist?
--------------------

Whereas vi's keystroke language follows **verb-object** order, Kakoune
inverts that by following **object-verb** order. In real terms, that
means you make a selection (object) before deciding what to do (verb)
with it. The object might be a character, word, WORD[^1], sentence,
paragraph, parenthetical, regular expression, you name it; the verb
might be **delete**, **yank** (copy), **change**, **indent**, or even
transformative operations like **lint**, **format**, **uppercase**, etc.
In Kakoune, it is with this reversed grammar, this postfix notation,
that you interactively sweep up a group or groups of characters before
acting on them. That way if your object isn't quite right, you can
immediately correct it without having to undo and redo your verb.

I like to think Kakoune's "keystrokes as a text editing language" model,
in comparison to that of vi, is what linguists would call an
*[anastrophe]*---specifically an object-verb inversion.

![In English, the subject-object-verb order can be seen in this
anastrophic idiom, "one swallow does not a summer make".[^2]]

To English speakers, it might seem unnatural to communicate by placing
the verb last, but consider that about 45% of documented natural
languages have subject-object-verb order, including Latin, Ancient
Greek, Japanese and Korean.

Isn't that just Vim's visual mode?
----------------------------------

Well, yes, but Vim's visual mode is a malformed afterthought in
comparison, and you have to hit `v` every time you want to use it.
Kakoune is visual mode done right, but not just that; it permits---nay
thrives on---multiple selections (thousands if you wish but typically
just a few) and provides some really neat tools to narrow them down
incrementally, [as we'll see later].

This paradigm shift necessitated a revised set of key mappings, which
Kakoune implements rather well if you don't mind using the Alt key.
Since uppercase motion keys tend to *extend* the selection, `<a-w>`,
`<a-e>` and `<a-b>` are used to traverse WORDs; similarly, since `a` and
`i` have jobs already, `<a-a>` and `<a-i>` are used to select 'an
object' or 'inner object'.

  English                            Vim     Kakoune
  ---------------------------------- ------- ------------------
  Delete word                        `dw`    `wd`
  Delete WORD                        `dW`    `<a-w>d`
  Delete inner word                  `diw`   `<a-i>wd`
  Delete back four words             `d4b`   `BBBBd` or `4Bd`
  Change to end of word              `ce`    `ec`
  Yank a sentence                    `yas`   `<a-a>sy`
  Change to next occurrence of `x`   `ctx`   `txc`
  Select to next occurrence of `x`   `vtx`   `tx`
  Indent three lines down            `3>>`   `xXX>`
  Unindent within braces             `<i}`   `<a-i>}<`

Admittedly, from the table above, my new favourite editor looks to be
more complicated than Vim. Perhaps that's true in some sense, but
Kakoune's strengths lie in its forgiving interactivity and incremental
results, which are best experienced first hand.

Using Kakoune
=============

At this point, I encourage the reader to play around with Kakoune. Have
fun with it! Install it with your package manager or build it from
[source][code base]. Skim over the manual page for kak(1) and open a
file in the terminal like so

``` {.bash}
kak example.cc
```

Make sure your terminal emulator supports alt key combinations and isn't
overriding them.[^3]

Have a look through `:doc faq`, `:doc keys` (then `:doc keymap` for the
cheat sheet), and `:doc commands`, experimenting as you go. That said,
the built-in help system is verbose and won't exactly hold your hand.
The [Kakoune wiki] is more navigable. You can edit files and manipulate
buffers with the following commands

-   `:edit <filename>`
-   `:buffer <name>`
-   `:buffer-next` and `:buffer-previous`

Use `:delete-buffer` to delete a buffer. Write to disk with `:w` and
quit with `:q`. As you enter commands, you'll see an ASCII art Clippy
show up in a box with the relevant documentation.[^4] Commands are
self-documenting, and many have a `-docstring` argument in their
definition which enriches these info boxes.

Depending on your terminal colours, things might be unreadable. If so,
or otherwise, pick a colour scheme using the `:colorscheme <name>`
command. Try not to spend too many of your precious Earth seconds
fussing over which is best, as I did.

Kakoune shares a good deal of elementary keys with Vim, which eases the
learning curve for veterans thereof. Of the lowercase letters, only `s`,
`z`, `x`, `v` and `m` have completely new jobs. Hitting `a`, `i`, `A`,
`I`, `o`, or `O` will enter insert mode in much the same way as in vi;
`q` handles macros; pressing `u` will undo (some will rejoice that it's
`U`, not `<c-r>`, to redo); I could go on. As you'd expect, many motion
keys accept counts, as in `4w` to traverse four words.

Motions
-------

Get the hang of using motions (`h`, `j`, `k`, `l`, `w`, `e`, `b`, `f`,
and `t` for starters) and their majuscule equivalents, holding shift to
extend the selection you already have, hitting `;` to reset the
selection range back to the cursor itself. Then, of course, `r`, `d` and
`c` are your destructive verbs, while `~`, `` ` ``, `<` and `>` are
transformative; `i`, `a`, `o` and `O` respect the selection range (try
it to see what I mean), as do `y` (yank/copy) and `p` (paste). Try
combining some of these with the Alt key and see what happens. Try
`<a-i>` or `<a-a>` and read the info box to see what you can do with
them; same goes for `[` and `]`, and their shifted equivalents `{` and
`}` which, predictably, extend the selection.

Kakoune does away with many of the `g`-something key-stroke sequences
employed by Vim. Press `g` and you'll see the 'goto' menu, which shows
you the handful of keys that could complete the key-stroke sequence.
Familiarise yourself with some of these.

  "Go to ..."                        Vim       Kakoune
  ---------------------------------- --------- ---------
  Top of buffer                      `gg`      `gk`
  End of line                        `$`       `gl`
  Beginning of line                  `0`       `gh`
  First non-blank character          `^`       `gi`
  Bottom of buffer                   `G`       `gj`
  End of buffer                      `G$`      `ge`
  Top of window                      `H`       `gt`
  Bottom of window                   `L`       `gb`
  Centre of window                   `M`       `gc`
  Last (alternate) buffer            `<c-^>`   `ga`
  Path under cursor / in selection   `gf`      `gf`

Same goes for `v` and the 'view' menu, which is for adjusting your 'view
port' into the buffer.

  "View ..."                   Vim        Kakoune
  ---------------------------- ---------- ---------
  Centre cursor vertically     `zz`       `vc`
  Centre cursor horizontally   Nope[^5]   `vm`
  Cursor on top                `zt`       `vt`
  Cursor on bottom             `zb`       `vt`
  Scroll left                  `zh`       `vh`
  Scroll down                  `<C-e>`    `vh`
  Scroll up                    `<C-y>h`   `vh`
  Scroll right                 `zl`       `vl`

Multiple selections
-------------------

Pressing `x` selects a whole line, `x` again the next instead; or hold
shift and see that `X` sweeps up multiple lines. Here's where things get
cool: sweep up a few lines with `X` or `<a-i>p` and then press `<a-s>`.
That splits the selection *linewise* into multiple selections. Another
way to accrue selections is using `C` or `<a-C>`. Play around with these
yourself. If things get out of hand you can hit `<space>` to reset to
one selection.

### Aligning columns interactively

This is one case where multiple selections are your best friend. You
just make your selections and hit `&` to align them vertically.

<figure>
<script id="asciicast-EiuIMgYNAPSdGYzdP2bsmt0ZF"
           src="https://asciinema.org/a/EiuIMgYNAPSdGYzdP2bsmt0ZF.js"
           async></script>
</figure>

### Narrowing

Still think multiple selections are a gimmick? So did I. Until I tried
some of the narrowing mechanisms. What do I mean by that? Well, let's
say you want to replace all occurrences of 'sir' with 'mate' inside a
particular paragraph. With your cursor situated somewhere within it,
you'd press

    <a-i>p

to select the whole paragraph, then (and this is the good bit)

    ssir<ret>

to select each occurrence of 'sir'.[^6] Now you have multiple
selections. Finally you'd type

    cmate<esc>

to change each into 'mate'.

<figure>
<script id="asciicast-r0mCpLIWpF2LiFg5d0qlWPlTb"
           src="https://asciinema.org/a/r0mCpLIWpF2LiFg5d0qlWPlTb.js"
           async></script>
</figure>

To achieve the same in Vim you'd need to specify the line range of the
paragraph in an ex command (perhaps with the help of visual mode,
i.e. `vip`), and provide the 'g' flag. In Kakoune, everything is
achieved with the keyboard-based "text-editing language" and as a result
is more interactive in that it provides incremental results so that you
can make corrections on the fly.

You *can* enter a regular expression (see `:doc regex`) into the `s`
command, but often simple key-stroke-based interactions thereafter can
achieve the same effect while being easier to come up with and adjust as
you go. As a contrived example, imagine trying to replace the word that
comes immediately *after* every occurrence of a pattern.

A commonly used technique is to press `%` which selects the entire
buffer. Then you can hit `s` to select occurrences of some pattern
throughout the file. The information in the bottom right keeps count of
how many selections you have.

The `%<a-s>` combo is useful for operating linewise on entire files. For
example,

    %s<a-s><a-k>include<ret>

will select all lines that contain the word 'include'; or, using
Alt+Shift+K, we can do

    %s<a-s><a-K>:$<ret>

to select all lines that don't end with a colon. We could then do

    <a-k>^def<ret>

to narrow down further to only those that begin with 'def'. Follow that
up with an `S` key like so:

    S\.<ret>

will split each selection at every period. As you can see, the narrowing
tools are immensely powerful and the possibilities endless. And if
you're still not satisfied, there's the `$` key which filters your
selections by piping each one through any program you like and keeping
only those for which the program exists successfully---meaning you could
always write a little shell script to be the predicate of that filter.

Changes through external programs
---------------------------------

Don't get too excited about `$` before you've met `|`. This key is your
program-wielding text-processing glue. The idea is that you make your
selection(s) in Kakoune, type something of the form

    |program args ...<ret>

and watch the magic happen. For each selection, Kakoune feeds it as
standard input to the program, and replaces it with the standard output.

### Word count and formatting

Starting with a simple example, you could select the entire buffer with
`%`, then run it through wc(1) to get a word count of your prose:

    %|wc -w<ret>

Or pipe it first through the appropriate [pandoc(1)] command to convert
it to plain text, thereby eliding markup from your word count:

    %|pandoc -t plain|wc -w<ret>

Or you could select a paragraph and pipe that through to fmt(1) or
par(1), which are programs that nicely reflow paragraphs of text from
standard input. This is why Kakoune seems to lack important features
such as text reflowing; instead it makes it easy to delegate this sort
of processing to other programs, thereby adhering a little closer to the
Unix philosophy.

### Evaluating code within the buffer

If your buffer contained a Python expression, say

``` {.python}
factorial = lambda n: 1 if n<1 else n*factorial(n-1)
print(factorial(13) + factorial(16))
```

then you could select those lines and pipe it into python(1) by typing
`|python<ret>`, leaving you with `20929016908800` as the selection.

<figure>
<script id="asciicast-0BHzz6J9fTVDKhfhKeRsLgG43"
           src="https://asciinema.org/a/0BHzz6J9fTVDKhfhKeRsLgG43.js"
           async></script>
</figure>

The `!` key does the same but without piping anything through to the
program: it simply copies the output of the program into the buffer. For
instance, `!ls<ret>` will add a list of the contents of the current
directory before the selection. `!cat example.sh<ret>` will add the
lines of the file `example.sh` before the selection.

### Inserting Emoji

Use `|` to conveniently pipe words like 'smile' 😄 and 'house' 🏠 to a
program that converts stdin to emoji, like this one liner:

``` {.bash}
#!/bin/sh
xargs -r printf ':%s:' | pandoc -f gfm -t plain
```

Maybe Pandoc is overkill here, but you get the point.

### Using the system clipboard

Piping to and from xsel(1) or xclip(1) is your interface to the X
clipboard. Now you can copy those snippets from Stack Overflow and feed
your cargo cult programming habit.

              Primary selection   Clipboard
  ----------- ------------------- -------------
  **Copy**    `$xsel -i`          `$xsel -bi`
  **Cut**     `|xsel -i`          `|xsel -bi`
  **Paste**   `!xsel`             `!xsel -b`

User configuration
==================

Mapping keys
------------

Of course, you can create key mappings for these things to your heart's
content. Nice thing about Kakoune is it has a proper way of keeping
*user*-specific mappings separate from *global* mappings, thanks to the
scope parameter of `:map`. By default, the comma key is the prefix to
all user mappings.

As an example, here is a mapping I use all the time:

    map global user m ': format;w;make<ret>ga: echo Making<ret>' -docstring 'Format and write the file, then call make(1)'

It's scoped globally because I want this to work everywhere. Now I just
hit `,m` to

-   fix my sloppy formatting (`: format`)
    -   the space after the colon prevents this command from being put
        into Kakoune's prompt history
-   write the file (`;w`)
    -   the semicolon separates Kakoune commands
-   run make(1)
    -   `;make<ret>` calls Kakoune's `:make` wrapper, which opens a new
        buffer
    -   `ga` goes back to the buffer I was working on
    -   `: echo Making<ret>` is just for visual feedback.

Have a look at `:doc mapping` for the full story. Note that `:map` is
one of those commands that can take a `-docstring` argument, which
become part of the self-documenting hints that you see throughout the
UI.

Classic line-editing shortcuts like `^W` and `^U` that predate even Unix
are missing from Kakoune's insert mode; "those shortcuts do not fit the
paradigm that Kakoune implements" says the `:doc faq`, but for me this
is one case where practicality beats purity:

``` {.ruby}
map global insert <c-w> '<a-;>b<a-;>d' -docstring 'Delete word backwards'
map global insert <c-u> '<a-;>h<a-;><a-h><a-;>d' -docstring 'Delete line backwards'
```

Persistent configuration
------------------------

Let's say you've mapped a few keys and set a few options. How do you
make them persistent between kak(1) sessions?

Create the file `$HOME/.config/kak/kakrc` and place your mapping and
options in there. This is the analogue to one's `$HOME/.vimrc`.

When you start kak(1), before sourcing your `kakrc` it first sources all
`*.kak*` files within your `$HOME/.config/kak/autoload/` directory. That
means you can put anything---even Git repositories in there
(i.e. plugins)---and all non-Kakoune files don't cause Kakoune any
grief.[^7]

Once your `autoload` directory exists, however, Kakoune decides not to
source the system run-time files under `/usr/share/kak/autoload/`, so
you'll want to link that system directory symbolically into yours:

``` {.bash}
    mkdir -p $HOME/.config/kak/autoload/
    ln -s /usr/share/kak/autoload/ $HOME/.config/kak/autoload/
```

Formatting the entire buffer
----------------------------

The `:format` command is provided as a shortcut for `%|` followed by
your formatter program, be it fmt(1), par(1) or something else like a
style linter. You just need to set the `formatcmd` option.

    set window formatcmd 'par'

The `window` argument specifies the *scope* of this particular
assignment. See `:doc options set-option` and `:doc scope` for more
explanation.

Also look at `autowrap_fmtcmd` and `autowrap-enable` which wrap lines
for you while typing, so it doesn't feel like you've reverted to using
Notepad.

### Reformatting the buffer on the fly

#### Lightweight markup

If you're writing in a lightweight markup language, be it Markdown,
ReStructuredText, AsciiDoc, or what have you, it's nice to have a
program go through your writing and fix little formatting mistakes here
and there, remove trailing spaces and unnecessary line breaks and so
forth. Kakoune's `:format` command lets you do this really smoothly
without leaving the editor. Just set `formatcmd` to some command that
calls your style linter with any appropriate arguments.

Pandoc can function as a style linter by telling it that the input and
output are of the same kind. ReStructuredText for example,

    set buffer formatcmd 'pandoc -f rst -t rst --reference-links'

where passing `--reference-links` is optional of course, but means you
can write an inline link and have it converted automatically to a
reference at the bottom of the file, which takes care of the otherwise
laborious task of managing references, their names and order by hand.

This could become slow for particularly large documents, and some style
linting programs will be slower than others. In this document, I'm using
Pandoc to reformat around 600 lines of text and it takes a fraction of a
second.

#### SCSS

In the screencast below you can see me fixing a poorly written
stylesheet using prettier(1) with this `formatcmd`:

``` {.ruby}
set-option window formatcmd 'prettier --parser=scss'
```

<figure>
<script id="asciicast-9zGnkfE066JPBUKXQ3OzLnnxb"
          src="https://asciinema.org/a/9zGnkfE066JPBUKXQ3OzLnnxb.js"
          async></script>
</figure>

Hooks
-----

You can use hooks to trigger a command when some event happens, such as
opening a new file, resizing the window, pressing a key in insert mode,
or the user being idle for some length of time. These also have an
associated scope. Read `:doc hooks` to see how they work.

### Filetype-specific run commands

Now, what if you want to set an option differently depending on the kind
of file you're editing? You can do that using the WinSetOption hook:

    hook <scope> WinSetOption 'filetype=<filetype>' <command>

This hook is triggered whenever the filetype option is set to
`<filetype>`. The command can be any list of commands. So to set a few
options that would be something like this:

``` {.ruby}
hook global WinSetOption 'filetype=(css)' %{
    set buffer indentwidth 2
    set buffer tabstop 2
    set buffer scrolloff 5:0
}
```

This can get repetitive for lots of different filetypes, so we can
factor this out using the function `filetype-hook` as defined below:

``` {.ruby}
def filetype-hook -params 2 %{
    hook global WinSetOption 'filetype=(%arg{1})' %arg(2)
}

filetype-hook css %{
    set window indentwidth 2
    set window tabstop 2
    set window scrolloff 5:0
    set window formatcmd 'prettier --parser=scss'
}

filetype-hook ruby|python %{
    set window indentwidth 4
    set window tabstop 4
    set window matching_pairs ( ) [ ] { }
}
```

Should you use Kakoune?
=======================

There's loads more to Kakoune, not least of which are its
[plugins][plugins page]. But the potential for it to be configured
exactly how you like is huge, and it's very easy to do so. I haven't
even talked about `evaluate-commands` and `%sh{…}` blocks here.

Kakoune is so smooth in the way it uses existing programs; take the
clipboard for example: why should Kakoune bother with implementing a
feature specific to and dependent on X, when it can very easily be done
in run-time configuration by piping to and from a program such as xsel?
This is a taste of the Unix philosophy, and it's what makes Kakoune so
wonderfully extensible.

But due to the difference in key mappings, existing Vim users will
become frustrated in the transition, and Vim veterans will be leaving
their beloved configuration behind, putting them back to square one. I
can see many Vim users dismissing Kakoune as an interesting idea, but
not worth the effort to learn. I mean, even [its creator][Maxime Coste]
describes it as an "experiment for a better code editor".

I have found that learning to use Kakoune's key stroke language has
messed with my muscle memory somewhat when it comes to Vim and crucially
Readline[^8], although not as much as I'd anticipated.

This write-up has been mostly positive, but my experience with Kakoune
has not been without issues:

-   I'm having to use alt keys all the time now, which can be a bit
    fiddly to say the least.
-   There's just no way to have the cursor turn into a pipe shape while
    in insert mode, which is a shame because many people rely on that to
    indicate whether they're in insert mode.
-   Insert mode auto wrapping, which uses fold(1), will occasionally
    create a new line in the middle of a word I'm writing.
-   Some people have reported slow startup times; for me it's a small
    fraction of a second which is tolerable but doesn't have the same
    *instant* feel as Vim.
-   I had to implement essential line-editing chords like `<c-w>` myself
    in configuration. The needlessly puristic reason given for their
    absence does not convince me.

Further reading
===============

-   [kakoune.org][Kakoune]
-   the [README.asciidoc]
-   the [Kakoune wiki]
-   [*Kakoune, the Text Editor I Didn't Know I Needed* --- Erik Engheim]
-   [*Kakoune* --- Bri Hefele]

[^1]: It is by convention that the uppercase 'WORD' refers to
    whitespace-separated groups of characters, whereas the lowercase
    'word' refers to consecutive runs of alphanumeric characters.

[^2]: I suppose, strictly speaking, SOV order would be "one swallow a
    summer does not make", but I liked the barn swallow photo too much
    to change it. (Credit: [JJ Cadiz], [CC BY 3.0]).

    More examples of object-verb inversion in English:

    -   "With this ring, **I thee wed**"

    -   "Till **death us do part**"

    -   "**Deep into that darkness peering**, long I stood there
        wondering, fearing."---Edgar Allan Poe, *the Raven*.

[^3]: MacOS users might find a fix [here][*Kakoune, the Text Editor I
    Didn't Know I Needed* --- Erik Engheim].

[^4]: If Clippy is bringing back unpleasant memories, you can change or
    remove the ASCII art by putting this in your user configuration:

        set global ui_options ncurses_assistant=VALUE

    where `VALUE` is `clippy`, `cat`, `dilbert`, `none`, or `off`.

[^5]: The closest approximations I can find are `zH` and `zL` to scroll
    half a screen width horizontally, alternatively there's
    `set sidescrolloff=999`. Anyway who really needs to centre the view
    on their cursor *horizontally*? It seems like it was added to
    Kakoune just for completeness. Vim beats Kakoune on the scrolling
    front in other ways like synchronous scrolling, for instance.

[^6]: `<ret>` refers to the Enter or Return key. See `:doc mapping` for
    more key names like this.

[^7]: See kak(1) (`man kak`) for details on how exactly Kakoune's
    run-time files are sourced.

[^8]: GNU readline(1) is the line-editing library used by countless
    terminal-based programs. I now use Emacs bindings in Readline,
    because they differ enough from Kakoune that I don't get confused.

  [Kakoune]: http://kakoune.org/
  [Maxime Coste]: https://github.com/mawww
  [code base]: https://github.com/mawww/kakoune
  [Using Kakoune]: #using-kakoune
  [plugins page]: https://kakoune.org/plugins.html
  [anastrophe]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anastrophe
  [In English, the subject-object-verb order can be seen in this
  anastrophic idiom, "one swallow does not a summer make".[^2]]: media/barn-swallow.jpg
  [as we'll see later]: #narrowing
  [Kakoune wiki]: https://github.com/mawww/kakoune/wiki
  [pandoc(1)]: https://pandoc.org/
  [README.asciidoc]: https://github.com/mawww/kakoune/blob/master/README.asciidoc
  [*Kakoune, the Text Editor I Didn't Know I Needed* --- Erik Engheim]: https://medium.com/@Jernfrost/kakoune-the-text-editor-i-didnt-know-i-needed-23d5f1d6ad97#setting-up-kakoune-on-mac
  [*Kakoune* --- Bri Hefele]: https://brhfl.com/categories/writing/#fn:f3880b8ddd47f69dc92486213c4d5eb2:1
  [JJ Cadiz]: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Cajay
  [CC BY 3.0]: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/deed.en
